# Derivatives

## [fMRIPrep](https://github.com/courtois-neuromod/cneuromod.fmriprep)

Results included in this manuscript come from preprocessing
performed using *fMRIPrep* 20.2.x LTS series
(@fmriprep1; @fmriprep2; RRID:SCR_016216),
which is based on *Nipype* 1.6.1
(@nipype1; @nipype2; RRID:SCR_002502).

The boilerplate automatically generated by the pipeline was adapted to match our preprocessing specifics (separate anat track and online preprocessing of functional data).

### Overview
The functional data was preprocessed using the [fMRIprep pipeline](https://fmriprep.readthedocs.io/en/stable/installation.html). FmriPrep is an fMRI data preprocessing pipeline that requires minimal user input, while providing error and output reporting. It performs basic processing steps (coregistration, normalization, unwarping, noise component extraction, segmentation, skullstripping etc.) and provides outputs that can be easily submitted to a variety of group level analyses, including task-based or resting-state fMRI, graph theory measures, surface or volume-based statistics, etc. The fMRIprep pipeline uses a combination of tools from well-known software packages, including FSL, ANTs, FreeSurfer and [AFNI](https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/). For additional information regarding fMRIPrep installation, workflow and outputs, please visit the [documentation page](https://fmriprep.readthedocs.io/en/stable/installation.html).
Note that the `slicetiming` option was disabled (i.e. fMRIprep was invoked with the flag `--ignore slicetiming`).

### Outputs
The outputs of fMRIprep can be found as sub-datasets of the [cneuromod.processed](https://github.com/courtois-neuromod/cneuromod.processed) super-dataset.
fMRIPrep functional preprocessing was run using the anatomical "fast-track" (flag `--anat-derivatives`) with sMRIPrep output described above, so as to use the same anatomical basis for all functional dataset.
The output was generated in `T1w`, `MNI152NLin2009cAsym` and `fsLR-den-91k` spaces as defined by [templateflow](https://www.templateflow.org/) to respectively enable native space and volumetric or surface-based analyses.

The description of participant, session, task and event tags can be found in the [Datasets](DATASETS.html) section. Each participant folder (`sub-*`) contains:
- `ses-*/func` containing for each fMRI run of that session file prefixed with:
  - `*_boldref.nii.gz` : a BOLD single volume reference.
  - `*_desc-brain_mask.nii.gz` : the brain mask in fMRI space.
  - `*_desc-preproc_bold.nii.gz` : the preprocessed BOLD timeseries.
  - `*_desc-confounds_timeseries.tsv` : a tabular tsv file, containing a large set of confounds to use in analysis steps (eg. GLM).

### Recommended preprocessing strategy
The confounding regressors are correlated, thus it is critical to only use a subset of these regressors. Also note that preprocessed time series have not been corrected for any confounds, but simply realigned in space, and it is therefore also critical to regress some of the available confounds prior to analysis. See the [fMRIprep documentation](https://fmriprep.org/en/stable/outputs.html#confounds) for details on available confound regressors. For python users, we recommend using [nilearn](https://nilearn.github.io) and the tool [load_confounds_strategy](https://nilearn.github.io/stable/modules/generated/nilearn.interfaces.fmriprep.load_confounds_strategy.html) to load confounds from the fMRIprep outputs, using with a standardized strategy. As the NeuroMod data consistently exhibits low levels of motion, we recommend against removing time points with excessive motion (aka scrubbing), and the `minimal` strategy available in nilearn is a reasonable choice. Because of the 2 mm spatial resolution of the fMRI scan, there is substantial impact of thermal noise, and some amount of spatial smoothing is advisable, the extent of it being determined by your hypotheses and analysis.

### Anatomical data preprocessing pipeline description (https://github.com/courtois-neuromod/anat.smriprep)

The anatomical data was preprocessed using [sMRIPrep pipeline](https://github.com/nipreps/smriprep).
It took as input the T1w and T2w of the first 2 sessions of all participants, which were averaged after coregistration.

A total of 2 T1-weighted (T1w) images per subject were found within the input
BIDS dataset.
All of them were corrected for intensity non-uniformity (INU)
with `N4BiasFieldCorrection` (@n4), distributed with ANTs 2.3.3 (@ants, RRID:SCR_004757).
The T1w-reference was then skull-stripped with a *Nipype* implementation of
the `antsBrainExtraction.sh` workflow (from ANTs), using OASIS30ANTs
as target template.
Brain tissue segmentation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
white-matter (WM) and gray-matter (GM) was performed on
the brain-extracted T1w using `fast` (FSL 5.0.9, RRID:SCR_002823,
@fsl_fast).
A T1w-reference map was computed after registration of
2 T1w images (after INU-correction) using
`mri_robust_template` (FreeSurfer 6.0.1, @fs_template).
Brain surfaces were reconstructed using `recon-all` (FreeSurfer 6.0.1,
RRID:SCR_001847, @fs_reconall), and the brain mask estimated
previously was refined with a custom variation of the method to reconcile
ANTs-derived and FreeSurfer-derived segmentations of the cortical
gray-matter of Mindboggle (RRID:SCR_002438, @mindboggle).
Volume-based spatial normalization to two standard spaces (MNI152NLin2009cAsym, MNI152NLin6Asym) was performed through
nonlinear registration with `antsRegistration` (ANTs 2.3.3),
using brain-extracted versions of both T1w reference and the T1w template.
The following templates were selected for spatial normalization:
*ICBM 152 Nonlinear Asymmetrical template version 2009c* (@mni152nlin2009casym, RRID:SCR_008796; TemplateFlow ID: MNI152NLin2009cAsym), *FSL's MNI ICBM 152 non-linear 6th Generation Asymmetric Average Brain Stereotaxic Registration Model* (@mni152nlin6asym, RRID:SCR_002823; TemplateFlow ID: MNI152NLin6Asym),


### Functional data preprocessing pipeline description

Anatomical preprocessing was reused from previously existing derivative objects.

: For each of the BOLD runs found per subject (across all
tasks and sessions), the following preprocessing was performed.
First, a reference volume and its skull-stripped version were generated
by aligning and averaging
1 single-band references (SBRefs).
A B0-nonuniformity map (or *fieldmap*) was estimated based on two (or more)
echo-planar imaging (EPI) references with opposing phase-encoding
directions, with `3dQwarp` @afni (AFNI 20160207).
Based on the estimated susceptibility distortion, a corrected
EPI (echo-planar imaging) reference was calculated for a more
accurate co-registration with the anatomical reference.
The BOLD reference was then co-registered to the T1w reference using
`bbregister` (FreeSurfer) which implements boundary-based registration [@bbr].
Co-registration was configured with six degrees of freedom.
Head-motion parameters with respect to the BOLD reference
(transformation matrices, and six corresponding rotation and translation
parameters) are estimated before any spatiotemporal filtering using
`mcflirt` [FSL 5.0.9, @mcflirt].
First, a reference volume and its skull-stripped version were generated
 using a custom
methodology of *fMRIPrep*.
The BOLD time-series were resampled onto the following surfaces
(FreeSurfer reconstruction nomenclature):
*fsaverage*.
The BOLD time-series (including slice-timing correction when applied)
were resampled onto their original, native space by applying
a single, composite transform to correct for head-motion and
susceptibility distortions.
These resampled BOLD time-series will be referred to as *preprocessed
BOLD in original space*, or just *preprocessed BOLD*.
The BOLD time-series were resampled into standard space,
generating a *preprocessed BOLD run in MNI152NLin2009cAsym space*.
First, a reference volume and its skull-stripped version were generated
 using a custom
methodology of *fMRIPrep*.
*Grayordinates* files [@hcppipelines] containing 91k samples were also
generated using the highest-resolution ``fsaverage`` as intermediate standardized
surface space.
Several confounding time-series were calculated based on the
*preprocessed BOLD*: framewise displacement (FD), DVARS and
three region-wise global signals.
FD was computed using two formulations following Power (absolute sum of
relative motions, @power_fd_dvars) and Jenkinson (relative root mean square
displacement between affines, @mcflirt).
FD and DVARS are calculated for each functional run, both using their
implementations in *Nipype* [following the definitions by @power_fd_dvars].
The three global signals are extracted within the CSF, the WM, and
the whole-brain masks.
Additionally, a set of physiological regressors were extracted to
allow for component-based noise correction [*CompCor*, @compcor].
Principal components are estimated after high-pass filtering the
*preprocessed BOLD* time-series (using a discrete cosine filter with
128s cut-off) for the two *CompCor* variants: temporal (tCompCor)
and anatomical (aCompCor).
tCompCor components are then calculated from the top 2% variable
voxels within the brain mask.
For aCompCor, three probabilistic masks (CSF, WM and combined CSF+WM)
are generated in anatomical space.
The implementation differs from that of Behzadi et al. in that instead
of eroding the masks by 2 pixels on BOLD space, the aCompCor masks are
subtracted a mask of pixels that likely contain a volume fraction of GM.
This mask is obtained by dilating a GM mask extracted from the FreeSurfer's *aseg* segmentation, and it ensures components are not extracted
from voxels containing a minimal fraction of GM.
Finally, these masks are resampled into BOLD space and binarized by
thresholding at 0.99 (as in the original implementation).
Components are also calculated separately within the WM and CSF masks.
For each CompCor decomposition, the *k* components with the largest singular
values are retained, such that the retained components' time series are
sufficient to explain 50 percent of variance across the nuisance mask (CSF,
WM, combined, or temporal). The remaining components are dropped from
consideration.
The head-motion estimates calculated in the correction step were also
placed within the corresponding confounds file.
The confound time series derived from head motion estimates and global
signals were expanded with the inclusion of temporal derivatives and
quadratic terms for each [@confounds_satterthwaite_2013].
Frames that exceeded a threshold of 0.5 mm FD or
1.5 standardised DVARS were annotated as motion outliers.
All resamplings can be performed with *a single interpolation
step* by composing all the pertinent transformations (i.e. head-motion
transform matrices, susceptibility distortion correction when available,
and co-registrations to anatomical and output spaces).
Gridded (volumetric) resamplings were performed using `antsApplyTransforms` (ANTs),
configured with Lanczos interpolation to minimize the smoothing
effects of other kernels [@lanczos].
Non-gridded (surface) resamplings were performed using `mri_vol2surf`
(FreeSurfer).


Many internal operations of *fMRIPrep* use
*Nilearn* 0.6.2 [@nilearn, RRID:SCR_001362],
mostly within the functional processing workflow.
For more details of the pipeline, see [the section corresponding
to workflows in *fMRIPrep*'s documentation](https://fmriprep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/workflows.html "FMRIPrep's documentation").


### Copyright Waiver

The above boilerplate text was automatically generated by fMRIPrep
with the express intention that users should copy and paste this
text into their manuscripts *unchanged*.
It is released under the [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license.

## PhysPrep

### Overview
The physiological data were preprocessed using a pipeline developed within the lab, called Physprep. 
Physprep is a pipeline that segments, cleans and processes PPG, ECG, EDA, and respiratory (RSP) signals 
from minimal user input. The Physprep pipeline integrates open access python packages including Phys2Bids, 
NeuroKit2, and Systole.

### Outputs
The description of participant, session, task and event tags can be found in the Datasets section.

Each participant folder (`sub-*`) contains the following outputs alongside the fMRI data:
- `ses-*/func`
  - `*_physio.tsv.gz` : raw segmented biosignals.
  - `*_physio.json` : contains tsv columns names, start time, and signal sampling frequency information. 

- `ses_*/derivatives`
  - `*_desc-preproc_physio.tsv.gz` : processed time series.
  - `*_desc-physio_events.tsv` : extracted sparse features.
  - `*_desc-quality.json` : quality assessment

### Preprocessing pipeline description
The workflow developed to process the physiological data is based on Phys2Bids 2.8.3; Scipy 1.9.0; Neurokit2 0.2.3; 
Systole 0.2.4.

The following section details the post-acquisition filtering procedure used for each physiological modality.


Photoplethysmography

: The PPG timeseries were first downsampled to 1000 Hz, before being filtered following recommandations given by [Elgendi et al. 2013](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0076585). 
The artefacts were removed using a bidirectional butterworth bandpass filter (low cutoff: 0.5 Hz; high cutoff: 8 Hz; order: 3). A notch filter was then applied to remove remaining artefacts (Q: 100; see [Bottenhorn et al., 2021](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.01.437293)). Systolic peaks were then detected using the method described in 
[Elgendi et al. (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0076585), and implemented in NeuroKit2 (see 
[`ppg_findpeaks`](https://neuropsychology.github.io/NeuroKit/functions/ppg.html#ppg-findpeaks) documentation). Systolic peaks corrected
using two different methods are available. In the  first method, peak placements were corrected using the peak-to-peak differences from the 
NeuroKit2 package: intervals between peaks outside of the 0.5-1.5 seconds range were identified as outliers, and were corrected 
(see [`signal_fixpeaks`](https://neuropsychology.github.io/NeuroKit/functions/signal.html#signal-fixpeaks) documentation). The second method 
is based on [Lipponen & Tarvainen (2019)](https://doi.org/10.1080/03091902.2019.1640306) and consists of detecting the type of erroneous beats 
(i.e., ectopic, long, short, missed, and extra beats) and correcting them accordingly.


Electrocardiography

: The ECG signals were downsampled to 1000 Hz. The ECG filtering procedure was implemented as per the [manufacturer application notes](https://www.biopac.com/wp-content/uploads/app242x.pdf). 
Namely, a bidirectional butterworth highpass filter (cutoff: 2 Hz; order: 2) was first apply to remove low frequency artefacts such as respiration 
and baseline wander. A second-order IIR notch digital filter was performed to filter fundamental and specific harmonics (Q: 100; see 
[manufacturer application notes](https://www.biopac.com/wp-content/uploads/app242x.pdf) and [Bottenhorn et al., 2021](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.01.437293)).
A bidirectional butterworth lowpass filter (cutoff: 40 Hz; order: 2) was finally applied. The R-peaks were detected using a 
probabilistic approach as implemented in the [NeuroKit2 ProMAC method](https://neuropsychology.github.io/NeuroKit/functions/ecg.html#ecg-peaks). R-peaks were corrected
using the same procedure as described above for the systolic peak detection.


Electrodermal activity

: The EDA filtering procedure was implemented as per [NeuroKit2 default EDA cleaning method](https://neuropsychology.github.io/NeuroKit/functions/eda.html#preprocessing). 
Since EDA signal is characterised by low-frequency components and MRI gradients introduce high-frequency artefacts, a bidirectional butterworth lowpass filter 
(cutoff: 3 Hz; order: 4) was employed to clean the signal, as suggested by [Privratsky et al. (2020)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2020.09.015). However, 
unlike what is proposed in that article, we refrained from applying a highpass filter to retain the tonic component of the EDA signal. The signal was than downsample 
to 1000 Hz. After the filtering procedure, the EDA signal was decomposed into its phasic and tonic components using the method implemented in Biopac's Acqknowledge 
(i.e. highpass filtering with a cutoff of 0.05 Hz). From the extracted phasic component, the skin conductance responses were detected by finding the local maxima in
the signal (minimum relative amplitude of 0.1).


Respiratory activity

: The RSP filtering procedure was implemented as per [Khodadad et al., 2018](https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6579/aad7e6), which includes a bidirectional 
butterworth bandpass filter (low cutoff: 0.05 Hz; high cutoff: 3 Hz; order: 2). The lower cutoff was set to preserve breathing rate higher than 3 breath
per minute. The signal was than downsample to 1000 Hz. The peaks and trouhgs were identified on the downsampled signal as per [Khondadad et al. (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6579/aad7e6).
From those parameters, the respiratory amplitude were calculated as the difference between a trough and the following peak. Additionally, the Respiratory 
Volume per Time (RVT) was computed using the method described in [Harrison et al. (2021)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.117787).

### QC-ing pipeline description
In order to evaluate the usability of the physiological data, quality indices were calculated for each modality on the filtered signals. These signals were 
analysed in 1-minute sliding windows for each run. The quality assessment is summarized in the `*_desc-quality.json` files provided for each run, which contain the percentage of valid windows across the run for each modality. That percentage was used to provide a `Pass` or `Fail` assessment, where the quality of the run is considered acceptable (`Pass`) if more than 80% of the windows in a run were considered as acceptable.

:::{important}
Even if a quality assessment is provided for each run, it is the responsibility of the researchers to make sure the data met their quality requirements. 
:::

Cardiac signals 

We assessed the quality of cardiac signals (PPG and ECG) for each run based on normal NN intervals mean and NN intervals standard deviation. One-minute segments were classified as good if the mean of NN intervals was within the range of 600 and 1200, and if the standard deviation was below 300. Based on the number of segments classified as good, 
we provided the percentage of the run containing cardiac signals within the normal NN intervals range. Futher quality checks should be carried out to ensure that the 
available cardiac signal is suitable for a given analysis.


Electrodermal activity

The quality of the signal was assessed for each one-minute window based on the procedure proposed by [Böttcher et al. (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-25949-x). This method uses a dual criterion based on the rate of amplitude change (RAC) and a threshold on the signal amplitude.

Respiratory activity

To ensure that the respiratory waveforms are within a normal range, a threshold of 0.5 Hz was used on the signal rate. If the averaged respiratory rate within a specific 
window was below 0.5 Hz, the signal was considered normal. However, if the averaged respiratory rate exceeded that threshold, the signal window was classified as having 
poor quality. Futher quality checks should be carried out to ensure that the available respiratory signal is suitable for a given analysis.